What is the definition of a screw?
1. Mechanical device that converts torque into compression (between plate and bone or two bone fragments)
2. Mechanical device that converts rotation into linear motion
What are the components of a screw?
1. Central core (core/inner/root diameter)
2. Outer/major diameter
3. Thread - engages the bone and is responsible for the function and purchase
4. Tip - can be blunt, sharp, self-tapping
5. Head - engages the bone or plate
6. Recess in the head
7. Pitch - distance between screw threads (a screw will advance a distance in the bone equivalent to the pitch)
What are the types of screw design?
1. Fully threaded, partially threaded, cannulated, self-tapping, locking, nonlocking
What is the difference between a nonlocking vs. locking screw?
1. Locking screws have large core diameter with shallower threads which maximize fatigue strength; screw head has threads that engage threads in a locking plate hole creating a fixed angle
2. Nonlocking screws have smaller core diameters with deeper threads which maximizes purchase power
What is the purpose of tapping prior to screw insertion?
1. Necessary for cortical bone (and dense cancellous bone) so that the torque is converted to compression rather than overcoming friction between screw and bone
2. Failure to tap can result in shear failure at the head shaft junction
What is the definition of 'screw pullout'?
1. Definition - the maximum force that a screw can withstand along its axis
2. Pullout force increases with larger outer diameter, smaller inner diameter, finer pitch, more engaged threads and greater density of bone
What are the types of screw functions?
1. Lag screw
a. Provides interfragmentary compression and absolute stability
b. Two ways to achieve lag screw function
i. By technique - near cortex is drilled slightly larger than the outer diameter and the far cortex is drilled to correspond with the inner diameter; the thread engages the far cortex and the head engages the near cortex
ii. By design - partially threaded screw inserted so that threads engage the far cortex and not the near cortex
c. Ideally directed perpendicular to the fracture line
d. Has poor rotation, bending and shear stability
2. Plate screw
a. Nonlocking screw that fixes plate to bone via compression
3. Positioning screw
a. Fully threaded screw that holds two bone fragments at a fixed distance without compression (e.g. Syndesmosis screw)
4. Push-pull screw
a. Temporary point of fixation used to reduce a fracture by distraction and/or compression 5. Poller (blocking) screw
a. Used as a fulcrum to redirect an intramedullary (IM) nail
6. Interlocking screw
a. Couples an IM nail to bone to maintain length, alignment and rotation
What are the types of plate functions?
1. Neutralization
a. Plate neutralizes shear, bending and rotational forces to protect the lag screw which provides interfragmentary compression
b. Fracture orientations = oblique or spiral
c. Fixation stability = absolute
d. Bone healing = primary
2. Compression
a. Plate maintains compression at the fracture site
b. Compression is generated by two mechanisms:
i. External tension/compression device and push-pull screw
ii. Plate design with oval holes and eccentric screw placement
c. Fracture orientations = transverse or oblique
i. Transverse fractures require slight prebending to prevent gapping at the opposite cortex of the plate
ii. Oblique fractures require plate fixation to the fragment with the obtuse angle to create an axilla for the opposite fragment to lock into
d. Fixation stability = absolute
e. Bone healing = primary
3. Buttress (antiglide)
a. Plate functions to resist shear forces and displacement when a fragment is axially loaded
i. Buttress plate = when applied to an intra-articular fractures
ii. Antiglide plate = when applied to diaphyseal fractures
b. Fracture orientations = intra-articular fractures that extend to the metaphyseal region (buttress) or oblique (antiglide)
c. Fixation stability = absolute (often combined with lag screws)
d. Bone healing = primary
4. Tension band
a. Plate applied to the tension (convex) side of an eccentrically loaded bone (e.g. femur, olecranon) converts bending moment into compression at the fracture site (functions as a
door hinge)
b. Fracture orientation = transverse or short oblique
i. The compression side must be anatomically reduced without gapping
c. Fixation stability = absolute
d. Bone healing = primary
5. Bridge
a. Plate bridges/bypasses an area of comminution with fixation proximal and distal to fracture site
i. Functions to maintain length, alignment and rotation while preserving soft tissue and blood supply at the fracture site
ii. Recommended to choose a plate 3x as long as the fracture zone
b. Fracture orientation = diaphyseal or metaphyseal comminution
c. Fixation stability = relative
d. Bone healing = secondary
What are the common types of plate?
1. Limited contact dynamic compression plate (LC-DCP)
a. 'LC' refers to the undercuts between screw holes which reduces the area of contact between the plate and bone to preserve blood supply; undercuts also distribute the strength evenly across the plate (eliminates stress risers); undercuts also allow for greater angulation of screws
b. 'DCP' refers to the oval inclined holes which allows insertion of screws in neutral or compression mode as well as for angulation of the screw
2. Locking plate
a. Threads in screw head engage threads in plate to create a fixed angle device
b. Conventional plates rely on the frictional forces between the plate and bone to resist applied load; locking plates rely on the plate-screw interface for construct stability
c. Preserves blood supply as plate-bone contact not essential
d. Conventional plates fail because of loss of bone purchase of the screw and sequential pull out of the screws; locking plates fail when all screws fail simultaneously
e. Locking screws must be applied after reduction and compression have been achieved
f. Indications:
i. Osteoporotic bone
ii. Bridge plating (internal fixator)
iii. Metaphyseal fractures with a short articular block
iv. Periprosthetic fractures (often require unicortical screws)
3. 1/3 tubular plate
a. Curved making 1/3 the circumference of a cylinder
4. Reconstruction plate
a. Has notches along the side of the plate between the holes enabling bending in three dimensions
5. Precontoured periarticular plates
a. Manufacturer specific plates designed to fit specific anatomic regions adjacent to joints; usually locking plates
6. LISS (Less Invasive Stabilization System)
a. Internal fixation plate that combines closed fixation of the distal femur using an anatomically pre-contoured plate with locked unicortical screws
What is strain and how does it correlate to fracture healing? [JAAOS 2016;24:711-719]
1. Strain = movement at a fracture gap divided by the original distance of the gap (expressed as a %)
2. Strain ≤2% = primary bone healing (heals with haversian remodeling)
3. Strain 2-10% = secondary bone healing (heals with endochondral ossification and callus)
4. Strain >10% = fibrous tissue healing
What is the consequence of a plate construct that is too stiff or to flexible? [JAAOS 2016;24:711-719]
1. Too stiff = insufficient callus, nonunion, plate failure
2. Too flexible = hypertrophic nonunion, plastic deformation of plate, malunion
What factors influence stiffness of a plate construct? [JAAOS 2016;24:711-719]
1. Plate length
a. Plate length should be 8 times the length for simple fractures
b. Plate length should be 3 times the length for comminuted fractures
c. Longer plates decrease stress concentration around the fracture and allows well spaced fixation
2. Plate material
a. Steel is stiffer than titanium and titanium alloy
3. Working length
a. Working length of the plate = distance between the proximal and distal screw in closest proximity to the fracture
b. Longer working length reduces stiffness
c. Shorter working length predisposes to nonunion
4. Screw density
a. Increased screw density increases stiffness
b. Screw fill should not exceed 50%
c. More than 4 diaphyseal screws are not required (even in osteoporotic bone)
5. Screw length
a. Bicortical vs. unicortical screws have a longer working length with greater bending and torsional resistance and ultimately greater stiffness
6. Screw type
a. Nonlocking, locking, hybrid
b. Hybrid constructs reduce plate to bone distance and increase strength
What is recommended for bridge plating? [JAAOS 2016;24:711-719]
1. Opt for titanium when possible
2. Longer plates preferred
3. Longest plate that is anatomically feasible
4. Minimum 2-3x the length of comminuted fractures
5. Less than 50% screw fill
6. ≤4 diaphyseal screws
7. Increase working length
What are the biomechanics of an intramedullary nail?
1. Stiffness depends on:
a. Diameter - stiffness is proportional to the radius to the 4th power (increased diameter = increased stiffness)
b. Material - stainless steel is stiffer than titanium
c. Wall thickness
d. Slotted vs. non-slotted - slotted nail is less stiff
2. Typically, a load sharing device (except in comminuted fractures it becomes load bearing)
3. Goal is to restore length, alignment and rotation (anatomic reduction is not the goal)
4. Nails resist bending moments but not compression or torsion
5. Interlocking screws function to resist compression and torsion
6. Fixation stability = relative
7. Bone healing = secondary
What are the advantages of an intramedullary nail?
1. Preservation of soft tissue and blood supply at fracture site (due to indirect reduction and percutaneous insertion distant from fracture site)
2. Reaming provides autogenous bone graft
What are the disadvantages of an intramedullary nail?
1. Disruption of endosteal blood supply
2. Reductions can be difficult in segmental and comminuted fracture patterns
What are the two general types of external fixation?
1. Monolateral/unilateral external fixation- frames are positioned on one side of the limb
2. Circular external fixation
What are the components of a Monolateral/Unilateral External Fixation?
1. Pins, clamps, connecting rods
What are the two main types of pins?
1. Half pin - protrudes from bone/skin from one side, has bicortical fixation
2. Transfixation (full) pin - protrudes from bone/skin on two sides, has bicortical fixations, has higher risk of neurovascular injury
What are the principles of pin insertion?
1. Avoid heat necrosis (sharp drill bits, frequent pauses, clear flutes, etc.)
2. Protect soft tissues
3. Avoid neurovascular structures and joints
How is Monolateral/Unilateral External Fixation stability increased?
1. Larger diameter half pins
2. Increasing the number of pins
3. Increasing pin spread in each fragment
4. Minimize the pin-fracture site distance
5. Minimize the bone-connecting rod distance
6. Place pins out of plane to one another
7. Adding an additional connecting bar in parallel ('double stacking')
8. Increase the stiffness of the connecting rod (increase diameter, carbon fiber > stainless > titanium)
9. Add a second unilateral fixator for multiplanar fixation
What are the pin mechanics in a Monolateral/Unilateral External Fixation?
1. Pin stiffness increases with increasing diameter
a. Too large = increases risk of fracture (pin >30% of bone diameter substantially increases the risk of pin site fracture)
b. Too small = increases micromotion at pin-bone interface (leading to failure)
What are the recommended pin placement sites and size in respective bones for Monolateral/Unilateral External Fixation? [JAAOS 2015;23:683-690]
1. Humerus = 5mm pins placed anterolaterally (avoid axillary n, radial n, and olecranon fossa)
2. Ulna = 4mm pin proximally and 3mm pin distally along subcutaneous border (preferred over radius)
3. Radius = 4mm pin along radial border (posterior to radial artery and superficial radial n)
4. 2nd metacarpal = 3mm pin entering radial border of 2nd MC base
1. Flex fingers at time of pin insertion, avoids entrapment of extensor tendon which would prevent finger flexion
5. Femur = 5 or 6mm pins placed anterolaterally or direct lateral
6. Tibia = 5 or 6mm pins placed anteromedial
7. Calcaneus = 5mm pin placed medial to lateral in safe zone (posterior to the halfway point from the posteroinferior calcaneus to the inferior medial malleolus and posterior to the one-third mark from the posteroinferior calcaneus to the navicular tuberosity)
1. Structures at risk = calcaneal nerve (medial), sural nerve (lateral)
8. Foot = 3 or 4mm pin medially into the talar neck, cuneiforms, or first metatarsal base, or laterally into the cuboid or fifth metatarsal base. For cuneiform pin placement, the pin should enter the dorsal half of the medial cuneiform
What are the two modalities by which traction can be applied? [JAAOS 2016;24:600-606]
1. Skin traction - pulling force is applied to the skin and soft tissue of the limb using adhesive traction tape, halters, belts, or boots
2. Skeletal traction involves a more invasive and direct pull on a bone through surgically placed pins, wires, or tongs
What are the 3 most common sites for lower extremity skeletal traction? [JAAOS 2016;24:600-606]
1. Distal femur
a. Indications - acetabular fractures not involving the weightbearing dome, pelvic fractures
with a displaced hemipelvis, adult proximal third femur fracture, pediatric femoral shaft fracture (90/90 traction), any contraindication to a proximal tibia pin
b. Pin location - placed from medial to lateral, >0.7 cm proximal to the adductor tubercle near the metaphyseal flare (avoids joint and femoral artery in the adductor hiatus)
2. Proximal tibia
a. Indications - femoral fractures located in the distal 2/3 of the shaft
b. Contraindications - ligamentous knee injuries, tibial plateau fractures, TKA with a long- stemmed implant
c. Pin location - placed from lateral to medial, 2.5cm posterior and 2.5cm distal to the tibial tubercle parallel to the joint
3. Calcaneus
a. Indications - tibial shaft fractures, distal tibia fractures, subtalar dislocation, intra-op distraction during ankle arthroscopy
b. Pin location - placed medial to lateral, safe zone is 3.1cm radius around the posterior inferior calcaneus
Describe the general technique for application of skeletal traction. [JAAOS 2016;24:600-606]
1. Local anaesthetic infiltrated into skin, soft tissues, and periosteum of both entry and exit sites, sharp incision of skin at entry site, blunt dissection of underlying soft tissue with blunt snap, insert either K-wire or Steinmann pin (pin diameter should be <30% of the bone diameter), pass pin through near and far cortex until tenting of the soft tissue at the exit site, incise the skin then advance the pin to final position.
2. Apply traction bow with padding to adjacent skin.
3. The weights are determined by the age, bone quality, and body habitus of the patient as well as the traction placement
4. Recommend post reduction xrays 6-12 hours after application to allow muscles to relax.
What are the indications for skeletal traction in the setting of acetabular and pelvic fractures? [JAAOS 2016;24:600-606]
1. Mainly a temporizing measure until definitive surgery
2. Immediate treatment of acetabular fractures with incarcerated intra-articular fragments or persistent subluxation of the femoral head, injuries often associated with posterior wall fractures
3. Medialization of the femoral head secondary to quadrilateral plate disruption
4. Pelvic ring injuries with complete disruption of the posterior sacroiliac complex, as seen in vertical shear injuries, may require skeletal traction to help reduce the displaced hemipelvis
5. Traction may also be an adjunct for a combined acetabular and pelvic ring injury that has been temporarily stabilized with an external fixator
What are the contraindications of skeletal traction in the setting of acetabular and pelvic fractures? [JAAOS 2016;24:600-606]
1. Nondisplaced acetabular fractures that are stable at fluoroscopic stress examination
2. Acetabular fractures through the weightbearing dome (irreducible with traction)
